---
title: About
layout: page
description: "This blog is meant to be a medium for the personal stories of open source developers."
show_in_nav: true
---

This blog is meant to be a medium for the personal stories of open source
developers. Each published interview will feature multiple aspects of the
individual: everything from his or her backgrounds, to why he or she got into
development, to why he or she decided to become a contributor to the open source
community.

The objective of this series is to show the pride and commitment these
individuals have in the work they do, and that their work is meant for the good
of the community.

### Participating

If you are an open source contributor and would like to be interviewed, let me
know using the contact information below, or reach out or sign up if you are
interested in just getting involved!

If you are an open source software developer and would like to be featured,
please get in touch at [by contacting us](/contact).

### Our Contributors

#### John Jones

[John Jones](https://johnjonesfour.com/) started \_theInitialCommit in September
of 2016. John is currently the Director of Technology at Adfero, a strategic
communications firm located in downtown Washington D.C. Through both his work at
Adfero and on projects such as this, John has a passion for leveraging
technology in meaningful, robust ways. While not a prominent open source
contributor, John understands the incredible value created by the open source
community thanks to the hard work and dedication of many. Follow him on Twitter
[@johnjones4](https://twitter.com/johnjones4).

#### Maddison Long

Maddison Long is passionately working on new technology trends that are shaping
tomorrow's societies. With a background in branding and technology marketing, he
has ample opportunities at Inocybe Technologies to promote a healthy connected
lifestyle. As the Marketing Director, he contributes to the growth and
prosperity of the OpenDaylight Ecosystem, and more broadly, the Canadian Open
Source Innovation Ecosystem through his involvement with Canadaâ€™s Centre of
Excellence in Next Generation Networks (CENGN). Follow him on Twitter
[@Maddison_Long](https://twitter.com/Maddison_Long).
