---
layout: post
title: "Jon Skeet"
description: "For work, I primarily contribute to the Google Cloud Libraries for .NET although I also did a lot of the C# work for Protobuf v3."
links:
  - name: jonskeet.uk
    url: http://jonskeet.uk
projects:
  - name: C# Google Cloud Libraries
    link: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/google-cloud-dotnet
  - name: Protobuf
    link: https://github.com/google/protobuf
---

### What project or projects do you maintain and what was your motivation for creating those projects and releasing them as open source software?

For work, I primarily contribute to the Google Cloud Libraries for .NET although
I also did a lot of the C# work for Protobuf v3.

Outside work, the main open source project I'm involved in is Noda Time although
I have various other small projects dotted around the place as well. For the
rest of this interview I'll use my Noda Time experience.

### If you created any of those projects, were they meant to solve a specific problem you faced, or were they born out of a larger opportunity you saw?

Noda Time didn't scratch an itch that I had, but it scratched an itch which I
believe the .NET community has... although the community itself is largely
unaware of it :(

In Java, most people are aware that java.util.Date and java.util.Calendar are
awful. That's why Joda Time became so popular, and has now been superceded by
the java.time package in Java 8.

In .NET, the DateTime, DateTimeOffset and TimeZoneInfo types are easy to get
going with - but hard to use well, and they don't provide enough room for
expressing "I'm dealing with a date" or "I'm dealing with a time of day" etc.
Additionally, TimeZoneInfo (on Windows) is tied to the Windows time zone
database, whereas for interoperability the IANA time zones ("Europe/London" etc)
are much more commonly used.

Noda Time provides answers for all of these things. I'm not claiming that it's
perfect by any means, but I'm generally pretty proud of how it turned out.
Unfortunately, it's not as widely used as I'd like it to be, because DateTime is
"nearly good enough" and its deficiencies aren't always obvious. (If you have
code which works for all but two hours of the year, and those two hours are at
night, how likely are you to be aware of the problem? How much are you going to
care about it?)

### How has the project evolved since you first got involved or first released it?

Initially, I released a revamped API over what was essentially the Joda Time
"engine" ported fairly directly. I kept the "engine" part internal though, and
I'm very glad I did so - it allowed a thorough refactoring later on.

Noda Time 2.0 is an even bigger refactoring - plus breaking changes - which acts
as the best demonstration I'm aware of about why encapsulation is important.
Users don't need to know how a LocalDate is stored internally, but they may
notice it getting much, much faster with 2.0...

One other small project has emerged out of my Noda Time work, which is time zone
validation - ensuring that it's easy for an implementer who is interpreting the
"raw" IANA time zone source data to verify that they're handling it the same way
as others. Just yesterday I found a bug in Noda Time through this validation step
\- and it's a bug I'd probably have never seen otherwise, as it affected one time
zone, just for six months, just in 1991...

### How do you spend your time on those projects? (i.e. Developing, managing the community, triaging issues, etc.)

I don't spend nearly as much time as I'd like, unfortunately. When I do, it's
typically infrastructure stuff - the web site, or documentation, coverage or
benchmarks. It's a shame this sort of thing tends to take so much of the time,
as I'd rather be working on the main codebase itself.

### How would you describe the community around projects you participate in? What are your favorite and least favorite aspects?

The community around Noda Time is reasonably small. There are a few people who
know it fairly well, and I'm pleased to say others know at least enough to help
answer questions on Stack Overflow etc. There are quite a few projects which
integrate with Noda Time, and every time I look for them, there are lots more -
that's always a lovely thing to see.

My least favourite aspect of community involvement is Gitter. I have nothing
against it as a product itself, but it's an interruption for me... it's intended
to be much more "real time" than it ends up, simply because I'm not in the
relevant room most of the time. So we end up something that's asynchronous like
email, github or Stack Overflow - but more transient at the same time. Still,
it's what several people seem to want to use, so I indulge them...

My favourite part of engaging with the community is reading tweets
occasionally... either "You should really use Noda Time - it'll solve that
problem for you" or (even better) "Just ported my code base to use Noda Time.
Went really well, and feels a lot cleaner now!" Those aren't verbatim quotes,
but there have been some lovely ones which are similar.

### What keeps you involved in those projects? Do you have long-term plans for maintaining your involvement?

Long-term, I'd love Noda Time to become obsolete like Joda Time, by Microsoft
bringing something similar into .NET itself. I can't see that happening any time
soon, unfortunately, but it would be great.

Beyond that, I really need to get the 2.0 release out, which I've been somewhat
sitting on for a very long time.

### What is the most important thing someone submitting an issue or patch should know?

For an issue, I'd follow the same sort of guidelines as I give about writing
good Stack Overflow questions. For patches... it's probably worth bringing up
the idea before starting to implement it, unless it's a minor bug fix. Sometimes
the idea may not pan out conceptually, which is easier to discover through
discussion than coding - and sometimes there may be things an existing
contributor could suggest to massively reduce the work involved.

### What’s your development environment right now?

Visual Studio 2015, and dotnet cli.

### What was your first development environment? Do you miss anything from it?

I learned to code on a ZX Spectrum. What is this "development environment" of
which you speak? :) I do remember using Eclipse for the first time - it was the
first Java IDE that made me feel more productive than just using a text editor.

### Where do you see the open source software community headed?

I'm reluctant to make any predictions, to be honest - they're almost always
going to be wrong. I think the proportion of open source code written for a
hobby instead of as part of a day job will continue to decrease, as more
companies see the benefits of it (in certain situations). Beyond that, I suspect
a lot may stay the same for quite a while - a lot of different languages and
platforms, religious wars over tabs vs spaces, and a fairly small number of
wildly successful projects, with a huge long tail of "somewhat used" projects
like Noda Time.
