---
layout: post
title: "Matt DesLauriers"
description: "I write and maintain lots of open source, with over 500 modules on npm."
links:
  - name: github.com/mattdesl
    url: https://github.com/mattdesl
projects:
  - name: budo
    link: https://github.com/mattdesl/budo
---

### What project or projects do you maintain and what was your motivation for creating those projects and releasing them as open source software?

I write and maintain lots of open source, with over 500 modules on npm. Most of
these are small utilities or demos, but a few stand out. My biggest project,
budo, is a development server for quick prototyping with npm and browserify. I
originally built it to solve some pains I had with the existing tools (grunt,
gulp, BrowserSync, Webpack).

### If you created any of those projects, were they meant to solve a specific problem you faced, or were they born out of a larger opportunity you saw?

Most of my work involves small prototypes, demos, and creative experiments. For
this style of development, it's best to use zero-config tools that allow for a
fast and iterative development environment.

### How has the project evolved since you first got involved or first released it?

Since it's inception, I've seen budo used on projects and demos by Mozilla,
Uber, Mapbox, and many others. It has become our primary development server for
many projects and prototypes at Jam3. A lot of the growth is thanks to the open
source community providing bug fixes, suggestions, and countless improvements.

### How do you spend your time on those projects? (i.e. Developing, managing the community, triaging issues, etc.)

Most of my time in open source is spent writing plain text, not code. Readmes,
documentation, GitHub issues, Twitter questions, etc. Sometimes the influx of
questions can be overwhelming, and I have to ignore my GitHub notifications for
a couple weeks to avoid burning myself out.

### How would you describe the community around projects you participate in? What are your favorite and least favorite aspects?

If the community finds something useful, it will step in to make it even better
— pull requests, comments, bug fixes and more. This is the best part of open
source, but also the hardest! If you build something useful, you will be
rewarded with a constant stream of questions and maintenence. :)

### What keeps you involved in those projects? Do you have long term plans for maintaining your involvement?

I continue to use many of my own tools and projects in my day to day work at
Jam3, so I will continue to maintain them when I have the time. In the long
term, I plan to retire some of my modules to other collaborators, which will
give me the freedom to explore new projects.

### What is the most important thing someone submitting an issue or patch should know?

Most people work on open source voluntarily and outside of their full-time jobs.
Respect, politeness and patience are the most important virtues when
contributing to a project.

### What’s your development environment right now?

I use budo, browserify, npm and Babel within Sublime Text — it's a really quick
and painless workflow for small demos and prototypes.

### What was your first development environment? Do you miss anything from it?

I originally started with Swing and OpenGL in Java, and I can't imagine ever
going back to that. One thing I did enjoy, however, was the code inspection and
autocompletion you get with a statically typed language.

### Where do you see the open source software community headed?

I hope to see more open and public information sharing in the future. It's
exciting to see GitHub and similar tools embracing data sets, scientific
research, books, "Ask Me Anything" Q&As, brainstorming sessions, collaborative
lists of awesome things, and all sorts of other content. The collaboration and
community around open source is what makes it so great, and I'm happy to be part
of it.
