---
layout: post
title: "Dominic Tarr"
seo_title: "An Interview With Secure-Scuttlebutt's Dominic Tarr"
description: "My main project is currently is secure-scuttlebutt. It's a decentralized database that maps to social media applications."
links:
  - name: github.com/dominictarr
    url: https://github.com/dominictarr
projects:
  - name: Secure-Scuttlebutt
    link: https://ssbc.github.io/secure-scuttlebutt/
tags: ["database", "javascript"]
---

### What project or projects do you maintain and what was your motivation for creating those projects and releasing them as open source software?

My main project is currently is secure-scuttlebutt. It's a
decentralized database that maps to "social media" applications. This
is a very aspirational project. On the one hand, there is a personal
"adventure" motivation, to build a thing that no one has built before,
explore new territory and name it. On the other hand there is a sort
of moral optimistic Sci-Fi motivation, the idea of liberating us from
perceived tyrannies. And there are many smaller things that form
details within that secure-scuttlebutt. Luckily, the details are
generally fun-to-solve problems on their own, so there are different
layers of goal and motivations that are interleaved

### If you created any of those projects, were they meant to solve a specific problem you faced, or were they born out of a larger opportunity you saw?

both of these at once. For example, when I started on the journey
towards secure-scuttlebutt (I didn't decide on that name or that
architecture until relatively recently) I was living on a sailboat, in
a swamp. I had a solar panel, but no internet, I would ride to the
library and use the internet there. Why should I have to be connected
to the internet for an application to work? But also, most of the rest
of the world has internet that is worse than I did. Most city-dwelling
westerners think that it's just a matter of time until the internet is
finally rolled out everywhere... but obviously it's harder than it
should be. Maybe you are in a airport or crowed cafe and now the wifi
is unreliable. I've been to fully rich cities where, like, 3g has no
bars because the buildings are too tall. lots of little
disconnections. It's still frustrating.

### How has the project evolved since you first got involved or first released it?

We have a usable prototype, and there is a community that is using it!
that is the most important thing. For a long time, it was just me and
Paul Frazee. Having others is very motivating. I'm would quite likely
have lost interest and started another project (and then lost interest
in that, etc)

### How do you spend your time on those projects? (i.e. Developing, managing the community, triaging issues, etc.)

It's very uneven. I enjoy when I have a big meaty problem to work on,
but the hard part is deciding what to do next, what problem to solve.
Working on that looks a lot like procrastination.

### How would you describe the community around projects you participate in? What are your favorite and least favorite aspects?

The best thing, and people in the community have said this, is that
everyone is nice to each other. We are only too happy to help a new
person, and always ready to explain ideas. We won't tell you to RTFM.

### What keeps you involved in those projects? Do you have long term plans for maintaining your involvement?

definitely the community. Although, one day I hope to "be finished",
and be able to work on other things, hopefully because the project
succeeds, not because it runs out of steam.

### What is the most important thing someone submitting an issue or patch should know?

This goes for any project, and it goes for receiving a patch as well
as making one,
but explain what you are trying to do, explain what the code does.
Don't just submit code. In text based communication, subtext rules
everything. There is a million ways to say "fuck you" without saying
that, so you need to avoid that, and instead saying "I respect and
appreciate you". But, you can't actually say that literally -
communicating that via subtext is believable. The simplest way to show
respect is to take your time to explain your self.

### Whatâ€™s your development environment right now?

second hand Lenovo x220 (if you want to write fast software, use a
slow computer) running Arch Linux, with a couple of terminals open.
text editor is https://github.com/dominictarr/hipster (I wrote that a
few years back, essentially as a joke, and it's pretty crappy but it
works and I still use it)

### What was your first development environment? Do you miss anything from it?

I once wrote a lot of code on a 7" Asus EEE. I could see 22 lines of
code at once. And I was writing java back then!
I think with a small screen you write less code.

### Where do you see the open source software community headed?

Away from hierarchy, towards flatter more fluid collaboration. The node
level community really showed me this. The model we were used to
before that was a to have a single "benevolent dictator" but we didn't
do it like that at all in level. I think partly the tools enabled this
because npm does modules so well, we could write independent modules,
rather than make PRs to a monolith. Or rather, most of the tools we
have points of control and artificial scarcity. You end up with one
person who can make a decision, so they have control, whether they
want it or not. Even on say, wikipedia, sure anyone can edit it, but
there is still a single "neutral" version of the article. Computers
have come to us via military, and then corporate accounting systems.
It's not surprising that are are about centralizing and empowering a
single perspective, but that isn't how people are. Everyone has their
own story. It's just a centralized power is easier to implement, but
think a decentralized one will actually work better.

That open source works at all is quite amazing, if you compare it to
the organizing principles that most of modern life is run under. But
you have to learn to collaborate, it's a skill. But also, those skills
can be concretized into tooling, like the shift from SVN to git, git
enables more decentralized, independent collaboration, but I think it
could be more decentralized.
on github you can add collaborators, but it's not the default, and if
you want your collaborators to be able to add collaborators you have
to shift it to an org, and make everyone else "owners", but it's a bit
of work to figure that out. Too often, we have this idea of ownership
built into the tools, that this project is "mine". I don't think that
is correct. If anything, the project owns you. Or you "belong to it".
A healthy open source project morally "belongs" to a community not an
individual or company, despite what the license might say. It's more
like the way tribal communities see themselves as belonging to the
land, rather than owning it. But our tooling doesn't tend to express
this directly. I think there are a lot of barriers to collaboration
that can still come down.
